--- PAGE 1 ---
search Center 
Field, Calif. 
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 
WASHINGTON May 1962 
--- PAGE 2 ---
1B 
n -- 
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM x-653 
COMPARISON OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FURJ3S WITH THAT OF 
FINS FOR STABILIZING LOW-FINENESS-RATIO BODIES 
AT MACH NUMBERS FROM 0.6 TO 5.8* 
By Leland H. Jorgensen, J. Richard Spahr, 
and William A. Hill, Jr. 
SUMMARY 
An experimental and analytical investigation has been made of the 
effectiveness of flares and of fins for providing aerodynamic stability 
of low-fineness-ratio bodies near zero angle of attack. Wind-tunnel 
tests were performed at Mach numbers from 0.6 to 3.8 to measure the 
normal force, center of pressure, and drag of bodies consisting of 
conical noses in combination with cylindrical midsections and finned or 
flared aftersections. This study included an investigation of the 
effects of nose bluntness, midbody length, flare angle (from 0' to 20°), 
and fin leading-edge bluntness. 
The results showed that for the same plan-form area, flares were 
more effective than fins, but for the same drag, fins were more 
effective than flares. Flow separation, which occurred ahead of a 
flare at certain Mach numbers, resulted in an increase in the stabiliz- 
ing effectiveness of the flare and a decrease in the drag. However, 
flow separation led to large undesirable shifts in the center of 
pressure. Blunt fins were found to be more effective than sharp fins, 
with the vertical as well as the horizontal fins contributing to the 
effectiveness. 
Comparisons of the analytical with the experimental results 
indicated that the analytical method employed gave good estimates of the 
stabilizing effectiveness of both fins and flares throughout the 
supersonic Mach number range. 
*Title, Unclassified w- 
--- PAGE 3 ---
2 
INTRODUCTION c 
The relative effectiveness of flares as compared with fins for 
stabilizing bodies of low fineness ratio is of interest in the design 
of ballistic and atmospheric entry vehicles. Although many investiga- 
tions have been made of the effectiveness of flares for stabilizing 
bodies (e.g., refs. 1 through lo), there is a need for direct compari- 
sons of flare and fin effectiveness over a wide Mach number range. 
Accordingly, an investigation was conducted to determine the stability 
and drag of several flared and finned bodies at Mach numbers from 0.6 to A 
3.8. Models consisting of conical noses with cylindrical midsections 5 
and finned or flared aftersections were tested. This stud included 7 
5 investigation of the effects of flare angle (from 0’ to 20 ) and of 
nose and fin bluntness. The range of flare angles chosen enabled 
normal-force and stability comparisons of finned and flared models to 
be made on the basis of either specified equal plan-form area or equal 
drag. Both experimental and analytical comparisons have been made, and 
the purpose of this report is to discuss these comparisons. B 
NOTATION 
cross-sectional area of cylindrical portion of body 
fin semispan measured from surface of cylindrical portion 
of body 
drag coefficient (exclusive of base drag) at zero angle of 
attack 
pitching-moment-curve slope referred to the moment centers 
shown in figures 8, 9, and 12, 
(pitchTAdmoment 
da 
normal-force-curve slope, - d (“orma:Aforce 
du 
- 
’stag stagnation pressure coefficient, 
qW 
diameter of cylindrical portion of body 
body base diameter 
--- PAGE 4 ---
3 
dW 
E trip wire diameter 
complete elliptic integral of second kind 
K ratio of normal-force component to normal force of fin alone 
length 2 
M free-stream Mach number 
A 
5 
7 
5 stagnation pressure 'stag 
free-stream static pressure 
free-stream dynamic pressure 
Reynolds number based on d s, 
R 
radius of fin leading edge 
radius of spherical portion of nose r 
r 
S 
center of pressure measured rearward from nose-cylinder 
juncture X CP 
X' CP center of pressure measured rearward from moment centers 
shown in figures 8, 9, and 12 
angle of attack, deg a 
@Ti- 
half -angle, deg P 
6 
Sub scripts 
A aftersect ion 
B (W> 
C unblunted cone 
CY cy1 inde r 
F fins 
F1 flare body in presence of fins 
1 
--- PAGE 5 ---
4 - 
N nose 
S spherical portion of nose 
W(B) fins in presence of body 
EXPERIMEKCAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Wind Tunnels 
The experimental investigation was conducted in the Ames 2- by 
2-Foot Transonic Wind Tunnel and the 1- by 3-Foot Supersonic Wind Tunnel. 
The 2- by 2-foot tunnel is of the closed-circuit, variable-pressure type. 
It has a flexible-plate nozzle and a perforated test section which 
permits continuous choke-free operation at Mach numbers up to 1.4. 
1- by +foot tunnel is also a closed-circuit, variable-pressure type and 
has a flexible-plate nozzle that provides a variation of Mach number 
from about 1.4 to 6. 
by varying the total pressure within the approximate limits of 1/5 of an 
atmosphere to 4 atmospheres. The 
In these tunnels the Reynolds number is changed 
The water content of the air in the tunnels is maintained at less 
than 0.0003 pound of water per pound of dry air. 
effect of humidity on the flow is negligible. Consequently, any 
Models 
In order to determine the stabilizing effectiveness of flares and 
fins, models consisting of bodies with and without flared and finned 
aftersections were tested. 
shown in figure 1 in three groupings: 
bodies with flares (fig. l(b) ) , and bodies with cruciform fins (fig. 1( c) ) 
In addition, the sizes and positions of wire rings that were placed on 
the body noses to trip the boundary layer are shown in figure l(d). 
nose shapes were used: one, a sharp cone of 1b02' 
(designated NS), and the other, a spherically blunted cone (2rS/d = 0.30) 
with the same cone angle (designated NB). 
constructed for testing both separately and with cylindrical bodies of 
2 and 3.37 diameters in length (designated C and CL, respectively). The 
cylindrical bodies were constructed so that flared or finned aftersections 
could be attached. All of the flared aftersections were of equal length 
(1.373 diameters) but with flare angles of Oo, loo, and 20' (fig. l(b)). 
The finned aftersections were of the same length and plan form as the 
20° flared aftersection. 
all sharp or all blunt leading edges and combinations of sharp and blunt Sketches and designations of the models are 
nose shapes and bodies (fig. l(a)), 
Two 
semiapex angle 
These nose pieces were 
As noted in figure l(c), cruciform fins with 
--- PAGE 6 ---
5 
A 
5 
7 
5 leading edges were employed. 
superimposed on a 100 flare was tested. All models were sting mounted 
from the rear with a strain-gage balance positioned inside each model. 
Photographs of typical flared and finned models mounted in the 1- by 
3-foot supersonic wind tunnel are shown in figure 2. In addition, a model with blunt fins 
Tests 
Tests were made to determine the normal-force-curve slope, center 
of pressure, drag, and boundary-layer-flow characteristics of the models 
at zero angle of attack for various Mach numbers. The test Mach numbers 
and Reynolds numbers based on body diameter are summarized in the 
following table: 
M 
5.82 
To determine accurately the normal-force-curve slopes and centers of 
pressure at zero angle of attack, the models were tested at half degree 
increments throughout the a range from -4' to +ho. The blunt-nosed 
bodies alone and in combination with the flared and finned aftersections 
were tested throughout the entire Mach number range (M = 0.60 to 5.82). 
The sharp-nosed models and the models with combined sharp and blunt fins 
(N$F%sE and N-$F%%) were tested only at selected supersonic Mach 
numbers. All of the models were tested with wire rings mounted on their 
noses in an effort to trip the boundary-layer flow (fig. l(d)) . The 
blunt-nosed model with the 20° flare (NBCFl20) was also tested without 
any rings at Mach numbers from 2.94 to 5.81. For all tests the 
shadowgraph technique was employed to observe model boundary-layer flow. 
Reduction and Precision of Data 
All of the force and moment data have been reduced to coefficient 
form. From plots of normal-force coefficient and pitching-moment 
coefficient versus angle of attack, values of C and C were 
determined, and center-of-pressure positions (x 
The measured base pressures were used to compute the base drag which 
was subtracted fromthe total drag measurements, so that the drag 
coefficients presented are for forces ahead of the body base. NU % 
/d) were computed. CP 
--- PAGE 7 ---
6 
The precision of the final data is affected by uncertainties in the 
c measurement of the forces and moments, and in the determination of the 
stream static and dynamic pressures used in reducing the forces and 
moments to coefficient form. These individual uncertainties led to the 
following estimated uncertainties: 
kO.OOl5 per deg u +oso 
cNcc 
M 20.01 for M 5 - 2.94 
CD kO.013 M 20.03 for M > 2.94 
REXULTS AND DISCUSSION 
For all the models tested, experimental values of CNa, xcp/d, and 
CD as functions of Mach number are presented in figures 3 through 6. 
Results for the nose shapes and bodies are given in figure 3, while those 
for the bodies with flares and for the bodies with fins are given in 
figures 4 and 5, respectively. 
flared and finned bodies of equal plan-form area. 
having boundary-layer trip rings are designated by unflagged symbols, 
whereas results for the models without trip rings are designated by 
flagged symbols. 
Reference is made to these figures in the following discussion which is 
divided into two major sections: (1) comparison of experimental effective- 
ness of flares and fins and (2) comparison of computed with experimental 
results. # 
In figure 6 results are compared for the 
Data for the models 
Representative shadowgraphs are shown in figure 7. 
Comparison of Experimental Effectiveness of Flares and Fins 
Flared and finned models of equal plan-form area.- Throughout the 
Mach number range, the results clearly show that flares are more effec- 
tive than fins of equal plan-form area. For example, in figure 6 it is 
seen that the values of (fig. 6(a)) for the flared models were 
higher at supersonic speeds than those for comparable finned models, and 
the centers of pressure (fig. 6(b)) were more rearward. As a result, 
the flare provided considerably more stability than the fins, especially 
at the higher Mach numbers. The gains in effectiveness of the flared 
over the finned models were, of course, accompanied by much greater drag 
for the flared models (fig. 6(c)). CN U 
r+ 
It is important to note here that some of the aerodynamic charac- 
teristics for the 20' flared models were greatly influenced by flow 
separation ahead of the flare. F 
The occurrence of flow separation was 
--- PAGE 8 ---
A 
5 
7 
5 detected from shadowgraphs, some of which are reproduced in figure 7. It is seen in figure 7(a) that a large region of turbulent-flow separa- 
tion occurred in the vicinity of the flare-cylinder juncture at 
This separation resulted in the sharp rise in 
at Mach numbers from about 1.1 to 1.2. The decrease in C as the 
Mach number was increased from about1.2 to 1.4 was probably due to a 
reduction in the extent of the turbulent separation, as evidenced in the 
shadowgraph at M = 1.37 (fig. 7(b)). 
effects of laminar flow separation appeared in the measured data. 
the test Mach numbers of 2.94 and 4.06, removal of the nose-mounted 
transition rings (shown in fig. l(d)) resulted in laminar flow with 
separation beginning well in front of the flare. 
showing turbulent flow, fig . 7( e), with shadowgraph showing laminar 
flow separation, fig. 7(d) .) The large increase in C for the model 
with laminar separated flow over that for the same model with turbulent 
attached flow is evident in figure 6(a). 
greater than 4.05, the transition rings were completely ineffective, 
laminar flow separation occurring with the rings attached as well as 
removed. 
resulted in a higher 
pressure and a reduced drag. Thus, the effects of flow separation were 
beneficial at a particular Mach number; however, the large shift in 
center of pressure when the flow changed from attached to separated was 
undesirable . M = 1.20. 
shown in figure 6(a) cN& 
NU 
At higher supersonic Mach numbers, 
At 
(Compare shadowgraph 
NU 
At the test Mach numbers 
mow separa-Lion (WIietIiei- lminar OT tar>ident) not only 
but also in a more rearward center of cNa 
Although blunted fins were used for the fin and flare comparisons 
in figure 6, the same general conclusions were reached when results for 
the flared model, NBCF~~O, were compared with those for the comparable 
sharp-finned model, NBCFS. In fact, as shown in figure 5, blunting of 
either horizontal or vertical fins or both was beneficial in increasing 
effectiveness, so that the advantage of flares over sharp fins was even 
greater than over blunted fins. 
Direct comparisons of the stabilizing effectiveness of fins and 
flares have been made by subtracting the short-forebody, NBC, results 
(fig. 3) from the results for the flared and finned models (figs. 4 and 5). 
The ratios Fl/cNa, F’ ‘%, Fl /c %, F’ and x:p, F1/xGp, F have been 
determined and are presented as a function of Mach number in figure 8. 
For the comparisons, the center of moments was taken at the fin- 
cylinder or flare-cylinder juncture (1.37 cylinder diameters forward of 
the base) . The center-of-pressure positions, x1 were referenced from 
this juncture as indicated in the sketch of figure 8. 
clearly demonstrates the increasing stability advantage of flares over 
fins as Mach number was increased. 
stability attributable to flow separation. C% 
CP’ This figure 
It also shows the great increase in 
--- PAGE 9 ---
8 -- 
Flared and finned models of equal drag.- For certain applications, - 
comparisons of the effectiveness of flares with that of fins of equal drag 
may be of greatest interest. 
having the same drag as the 20° blunt-finned model, NBCF'B, it was found by 
interpolation of the drag results for the flared models that the flare 
angle for such a model would be about 7' at the supersonic Mach numbers 
considered. Values of CN~ and xcp/d for this model were then determined 
by interpolation. As for the models of equal plan-form area, the results 
for the forebody alone were subtracted from those for the total model and 
the rat io s CN,, F/CN,, F1, C%, /c %, F1, and x;~, F/x&~, ~1 were determined. 
These ratios, presented in figure 9, clearly show the greater effectiveness 
of the fins. However, it is important to note that the advantage of fins 
over flares decreased with increasing Mach number. Although no tests were made of a flared model 
1 
1 
Comparisons of Computed With Experimental Results 
Comparisons of computed with experimental results (figs. 10 and 11) 1 
indicate that for models without flow separation, the aerodynamic charac- 
teristics can be predicted reasonably well by the methods outlined in 
the appendix. No attempt was made to predict the conditions for flow 
separation or the effects of separation on the forces and moinents. 
seen in figure 10 for a model with a 20' flare (N$F1;10), flow separation 
in front of the flare resulted in values of C much greater than 
computed, and centers of pressure much more rearward. For the models 
with attached flow the calculated curves were determined both with and 
without the inclusion of experimental lift from the cylindrical body. 
In the calculative procedure outlined in the appendix, it was assumed 
that there was no lift from the body cylinder. 
experimental results for the nose and for the nose with body (shown in 
fig. 3), it was found that the cylindrical portion of the body was 
contributing to the lift. In figures 10 and 11, the calculated curves 
with the experimental lift of the cylindrical body included are generally 
in better agreement with experiment than those without it. As 
NU 
However, from the 
Comparisons of computed with experimental stabilizing effectiveness 
of fins relative to flares have been made and are presented in figure 12. 
These comparisons are presented for the specified conditions of equal 
plan-form area (fig . 12( a) ) and equal drag (fig . 12(b) ) . 
experimental results previously presented in figures 8 and 9, the 
comparisons are general in that the forebody contribution to the 
aerodynamic characteristics was not included. 
plan-form area (fig. 12(a) ) , the increase in superiority of flares over 
fins as Mach number was increased was closely predicted except when flow - 
separation occurred. 
with Mach number of the advantage of fins over flares was only approxi- 
mated by theory. However, the theoretical and experimental trends with As for the 
On the basis of equal 
For specified equal drag (fig . l2(b) ) , the decrease 
--- PAGE 10 ---
- 9 
A 
5 
7 
5 Mach number indicate that there my be little or no advantage of fins 
over flares at Mach numbers above about 6. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Wind-tunnel tests and theoretical calculations have been made to 
compare the effectiveness of flares with that of fins for stabilizing 
low-fineness-ratio bodies near zero angle of attack over the Mach 
number range of 0.6 to 5.8. 
following conclusions have been drawn: On the basis of this investigation, the 
1. Flares provided more stability but also more drag than fins 
of the same plan-form area. 
advantage of flares over fins increased and the drag disadvantage 
diminished. With increase in Mach number, the stability 
2. Fins provided more stability than a flare having the same drag. 
With increase in Mach number, howevei-, the sta3ility advantage of fins 
decreased. 
3. Flow separation, which occurred ahead of a flare at some Mach 
numbers, caused an increase in the stabilizing effectiveness and a 
decrease in the drag of the flare, but this effect led to large unde- 
sirable shifts in the center of pressure. 
4. Blunt fins gave more longitudinal stability than sharp fins of 
the same plan area, with the vertical as well as the horizontal fins 
contributing to the stabilizing effectiveness. 
5. The aerodynamic characteristics contributed by the fins or flares 
were virtually unaffected by changes in nose bluntness or body length. 
6. Analytical methods provided good estimates of the fin and flare 
effectiveness at supersonic Mach numbers. 
Ames Research Center 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Moffett Field, Calif., Mar. 19, 1962 
--- PAGE 11 ---
10 
APPENDIX 
FORMULAS FOR P-DICTING THE AERODYNAMIC CaCTERISTICS OF 
FLAXFlD OR FINNED BODIES 
General analytical expressions have been derived for the calculation 
of CNa, C%, and CD for 
at zero angle of attack. 
site body, illustrated in 
teristics for the parts. the component parts of a flared or finned body 
The aerodynamic characteristics for the compo- 
sketch (a), were taken as the sum of the charac- 
Formulas for computing the characteristics for A 
5 
7 
5 
I Finned or ~ 
Nose I Cy1 inder i flared , I 
I 
I I aftersection 
I 
Sketch (a) 
the component parts are presented in the following sections. 
are presented for the cylindrical portion of the body, since the theore- 
tical values of C , C and CD (exclusive of skin-friction drag) are No formulas 
all zero. Na ma’ 
CN, AND C% AT ZERO ANGLE OF ATTACK 
Body Nose 
For a spherically blunted cone (sketch (b)), the expressions for 
for %, C CN~ and C% in terms of C for a spherical segment and 
a sharp-nosed cone are Na, s 
--- PAGE 12 ---
c 11 
A 
5 
7 
5 xN +- d cNa,N 
are based on the cylinder cross-sectional area, 
and the reference length for 
the derivation of equation (2), the center of pressure of the spherical is the cylinder diameter d. In ma? N and C where cNa,N 
cma, N 
Moment reference center 
'T dl 
I 
Sketch (b) 
nose was taken as the center of the sphere, and the center of pressure 
of the nose cone without blunting was assumed to be at 2/3 cos2% 
its length from the imaginary vertex. The quantity C was obtained 
from the modified Newtonian relationship for a spherical segment of 
Na, s 
For the calculations of this report, Cpstag was taken as 1.8. 
cal values of C for an unblunted cone with the same as the 
blunted conical nose were obtained from chart 8 of reference 11. Theoreti- 
Na, c 
--- PAGE 13 ---
Flared Aftersection 
For a conical flared aftersection (sketch (b)), the formulas are 
Finned Aftersection 
For an aftersection consisting of a circular cylinder in combination 
with thin fins having sharp leading edges (sketch (c) with 
small), the formulas are b vanishingly 
where K is the sum of the interference factors QJ~) and.KB(wA given 
in figures 2 and 5 of reference 12 and 
(ref. 13) linea ized wing t eory %,W 
-I r 1 
4 
.. 
--- PAGE 14 ---
c 
A 
5 
7 
5 I 
I 
I 
I 
“F 
Aftersection with sharp fins 
For an aftersection with blunt leading-edged fins (sketch (a)), the 
caused by bluntness of the two vertical fins ma, F additional CN and C a, F 
Wb in 
t 
Af tersection wi 
were derived by the 
expressions are h blunt fins Rear view of blunt fin 
Sketch (d) 
use of modified Newtonian theory. The derived 
--- PAGE 15 ---
14 
where - --- 
AC ma, F =-(2. 2d tan a 6~ )"cNa,F 
of leading-edge bluntness of 
ma7 F and C cNa, F The predicted effects on 
the horizontal fins of the present investigation were found to be 
negligible . 
CD AT ZERO ANGLE OF ATTACK 
The drag coefficient for the complete model configuration was 
assumed to be equal to the sum of the drag coefficients of the component 
parts, with base drag coefficient omitted. For each component the drag 
coefficient was taken as the sum of the pressure drag and skin-friction 
drag coefficients. 
believed to be essentially turbulent, the skin-friction drag coefficients 
were computed by the T' 
in reference 14. 
and apply to the general configuration in sketch (a). Since the boundary-layer flow over the models was 
method, the details of which are clearly given 
The formulas which follow are for pressure drag only 
Body Nose 
For the spherically blunted conical nose (sketch (b)), the drag 
coefficient was computed from 
was the drag coefficient of the spherical tip of radius rs, where cDs 
and CD 
8~. was the drag coefficient of the unblunted cone of half-angle 
was obtained from The drag coefficient of the spherical tip C 
cDS 
~ the modified Newtonian relationship A 
5 
7 
5 
--- PAGE 16 ---
was taken as 1.8. The drag %tag For the calculations of this report, 
coefficient of the unblunted cone 
Taylor-Maccoll theory, and values of CD 
in reference ll. C% was assumed to be that given by 
were obtained from chart 6 C 
Flared Aftersection 
For the flared aftersection (sketch (b)), the drag coefficient was 
computed from 
where CR was the drag coefficient of the cone of diameter d' and 
half-angles 
cDC 6~1. As for the conical portion of the nose, values of 
were o"uta~~e6 from chart. 6 in reference 11. 
Finned Aftersection 
Modified Newtonian theory (with C = 1.8) was applied to obtain 
the drag coefficients for the sharp- and blunt-finned aftersections. For 
the sharp-finned aftersection indicated in sketch (e), the drag coeffi- Pstag 
cient was estimated from 
- CDF - 
For the aftersection with the blunt leading-edged fins (sketch (d) ) , 
the drag of the rounded leading edges was added to that of the side 
wedges to give the expression . 
a% + l6 %tag - (15) 
--- PAGE 17 ---
16 
where 
r 1 
A 
5 
7 
5 
USE OF TRE FOFQ4UlAS FOR RYPEFGONIC MACH NUMBERS 
At hypersonic Mach nunibers (probably above about 6) the formulas 
for the flared and finned aftersections should be multiplied by the ratio 
of the local to the free-stream dynamic pressure. Also, the values of 
used in the formulas should be determined ‘N,,c’ ‘Na,w’ ‘DCJ and ‘Pstag 
for the local instead of the free-stream Mach number. If the bow shock- 
wave position is known, local flow conditions can be estimated by the 
method of reference 17. For the present investigation, however, free- 
stream flow conditions were assumed in all of the calculations. 
--- PAGE 18 ---
2B 
REFERENCES 
A 
5 
7 
5 1. Kehlet, Alan B.: Some Effects of Reynolds Number on the Stability 
of a Series of Flared-Body and Blunted-Cone Models at Mach Numbers 
from 1.62 to 6.86. NACA RM L57J29, 1958. 
2. Dennis, David H.: The Effects of Boundary-Layer Separation Over 
NACA RM A57130, 1937. Bodies of Revolution With Conical Tail. 
3. Eggers, A. J., Jr., and Syvertson, Clarence A.: Experimental Inves- 
tigation of a Body Flare for Obtaining Pitch Stability and a Body 
Flap for Obtaining Pitch Control in Hypersonic Flight. 
A54J7-3, 1955. NACA RM 
4. Knechtel, Earl D., Treon, Stuart L., and Wakefield, Roy M. : Transonic 
Static Aerodynamic Characteristics of a Blunt Cone-Cylinder Body 
With Flared Afterbody or Blunt Cruciform Fins. NASA TM X-40, 1959. 
5. Wakefield, Roy M., Knechtel, Earl D., and Treon, Stuart L.: Transonic 
Static Aerodynamic Characteristics of a Biunt Cone-Cyiiii&er "Dodji 
With Flared Afterbodies of Various Angles and Base Areas. NASA 
TM x-106, 1959. 
6. Knechtel, Earl D., Wakefield, Roy M., and Treon, Stuart L.: Transonic 
Static Aerodynamic Characteristics of a Low-Fineness-Ratio Body of 
Revolution Having a Blunt Ellipsoidal Nose and Flared Afterbodies 
of Various Angles and Base Areas. NASA TM X-113, 1960. 
7. Treon, Stuart L., Wakefield, Roy M., and Knechtel, Earl D.: Effects 
of Nose Shape and Afterbody Flare on the Transonic Characteristics 
of a Low-Fineness-Ratio Body of Revolution. NASA TM X-164, 1960. 
8. Wakefield, Roy M., Treon, Stuart L., and Knechtel, Earl D.: Effects 
of Centerbody Length and Nose Shape on the Transonic Characteristics 
of Low-Fineness-Ratio Bodies of Revolution With a Flared Afterbody. 
NASA TM X-366, 1960. 
9. Treon, Stuart L.: Effects of Nose Cone Angle on the Transonic Aero- 
dynamic Characteristics of a Blunt Cone-Cylinder Body Having a 
Cylindrical, Flared, or Blunt-Finned Afterbody. NASA TM x-582, 
1961. 
10. Reese, David E., Jr., and Wehrend, William R., Jr.: An Investigation 
of the Static and Dynamic Aerodynamic Characteristics of a Series 
of Blunt-Nosed Cylinder-Flare Models at Mach Numbers From 0.65 to 
2.20. NASA TM X-110, 1960. 
11. Ames Research Staff: Equations, Tables, and Charts for Compressible 
Flow. NACA Rep. 1135, 1953. 
--- PAGE 19 ---
18 -- .I 
12. Pitts, William C., Nielsen, Jack N., and Kaattari, George E.: Lift 
and Center of Pressure of Wing-Body-Tail Combinations at Subsonic, 
Transonic, and Supersonic Speeds. NACA Rep. 1307, 1957. 
13. Puckett, A. E., and Stewart, H. J.: Aerodynamic Performance of 
Jour. Aero. Sci., vol. 14, Delta Wings at Supersonic Speeds. 
no. 10, Oct. 1947, pp. 567-578. 
14. Shapiro, A. H.: The Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible 
Fluid Flow. Vol. 11, chs. 26 and 27, The Ronald Press Co., 
New York, 1954. 
15. Seiff, Alvin, and Whiting, Ellis E.: Calculation of Flow Fields 
From Bow-Wave Profiles for the Downstream Region of Blunt-Nosed 
Circular Cylinders in Axial Hypersonic Flight. NASA TN D-1147, 
1961. A 
5 
7 
5 
--- PAGE 20 ---
20 
t Rad. =0.25 d 
NB 
d = 1.25 in. d = 1.25 in. 
(a) Nose shapes and bodies. (b) Bodies with flares. 
Figure 1.- Models tested. 
--- PAGE 21 ---
21 
M L 
Wind Rings dw 
tunnel used in. -- 
LRad.=O.lO d 
5.37 d 14.59 d -4 
- 
NBC FB, S, 
.- 
LRad.= 0.10 d 
d = 1.25 in. 
(c) Bodies with fins. 
7- dw 
0.008 
4.06 to 5.82 a and b 
d = 1.25 in. 
(d) Sizes and positions of boundary - layer 
trip rings. 
Figure 1 .- Concluded. 
--- PAGE 22 ---
22 
A-26685 (a) Flared model, NBCF~~O. .. 
I . 
(b) Finned model, NBCFB. A-26686 
Figure 2.- Typical flared and finned models mounted in the Ames 1- by 
3-mot Supersonic Wind Tunnel. w 
..V-Un- -- 
--- PAGE 23 ---
23 
0 0 
--- PAGE 24 ---
24 
I 0 4 
--- PAGE 25 ---
0 
--- PAGE 26 ---
I cucq t - 0 - 
n 0 t 
--- PAGE 27 ---
.-e,,- -. . 1 27 
--- PAGE 28 ---
-- 28 - 
9 
CD 
A 
5 
7 
5 
0 
--- PAGE 29 ---
% 3 a 
2 
Q) 0 
6 
2 k a0 kk 6 
l? k 0 
k l? G 0 
m 
ho d .d k La 
.d k 8 .-. 0 .d k 651 
a PI .d k -P PI .d k -P PI .d k -P ..\ 
(D 
3 ch f ... ..\ 
(D : ch 
f (D 
3 ch f 
0 
II 
ffi 0 
II 
ffi 2 k 
cd 0 
II 
ffi d ..\ \o 0 ... \b' 0 k 0 
h 
% 
pk 
Q) 11 
x - a W n-P 2% 0 0 
II d, rn t3 0 d 
FI 0 
m 
ho d .d k k 0 m 
bo d .d k 
PI .d k -P PI .d k -P 
! 
t- 0 
II 
ffi 0 
II 
ffi 
L- 
rl 
II .-. 
"? 
E 
P n 
W 0 
II 
ffi 
..\ 0 cu .-. -3 cn 
cu 
II 
E 
n 
v 0 
--- PAGE 30 ---
30 
12 
8 
CNa,FL 
CNa,F 
4 
0 
12 
8 
',a, Fl, 
F 
4 
0 
x'cp, FL 
x'cp, F Separoted flow 
4 5 6 0 I 2 3 
M 
Figure 8.- Ratio of flare to fin effectiveness for equal plan-form area; 
a = 00. 
--- PAGE 31 ---
12 
8 
4 
0 
4 
“c p, FL 
c 12 
T w 8 
4 
0 
0 I 2 3 4 5 6 
M 
0 Figure 9.- Ratio of fin to flare effectiveness for equal drag; a = 0 . 
--- PAGE 32 ---
32 
--- PAGE 33 ---
33 
--- PAGE 34 ---
34 
c 
A 
5 
7 
5 
.. 
--- PAGE 35 ---
35 
. 
a, U 0 N - a, U 0 N 
U N (D 
In 
U 
mz 
N 
0 
(D 
In 
0 I 
NASA-Langley, 1962 A-5 75 
